





Exercise: Epipolar Geometry





1	Suggested reading

Section 13.4 of the course book (Bigun, Vision With Direction) introduces some of the terminology 
used in the exercise. The theory is discussed in section 13.5 and determination of the fundamental 
matrix in 13.6.


2	Determining the Fundamental Matrix

As you have seen during the theory classes, the projective coordinates (homogenous coordinates) 
of two corresponding points pr and pl (the notation used here is slighly different from that of the 
book, p represent the vector from the origin to a point in the corresponding image frame) in the 
image frames of the two cameras are linked by the following relation (the epipolar equation):

r Fpl = 0.	(1)

Matrix F is a rank-2 3-by-3 matrix known as the fundamental matrix.
   Determining matrix F is straightforward once you know the coordinates pr (i) and pl(i) for at 
least 8 corresponding points, since you can then obtain eight equations for the components of F 
(you do not need nine equations, since F is defined up to a scale factor). This way of finding F is 
known as the “Eight-Point Algorithm”; in practice, however, you might need more points to keep 
numerical errors low.
For each point i you have
pr (i)T Fpl(i) = ???????(pr (i))j (pl(i))k Fjk = 0	(2)
j	k

which you can write as the product of a row and a column vector:

[(pr (i))j (pl(i))k ][Fjk ]T = 0	(3)
where each vector has nine components (one for all the possible values of j and k).
   When you have several equations like this, you can combine them by grouping the row vectors 
in a matrix Q:
Q[Fjk ]T  = 0	(4)
where Q has one row for each pair of corresponding points. You can then easily determine [Fjk ]T 
by computing the eigenvalues of QTQ and taking the eigenvector corresponding to the smallest (in 
theory zero) eigenvalue.
   For numerical reasons, it is better to normalize the coordinates of the points before solving the 
system; the next section explains how to do this.


3	Normalizing the image coordinates

It is preferable to normalize the coordinates in the image domain so that they have zero average 
and unit variance before proceeding with the computation above; otherwise, matrix Q can be 
seriously ill-conditioned.





This is done by multiplying each point pl  by matrix
?1/d	0	?x¯/d?


Hl = ?


0	1/d	?y¯/d?	(5)
0	0	1



where x¯ is the average x component, y¯ is the average y component and




d =	i(xi ? x¯)


+   i(yi ? y¯)2




with n equal to the number of points.


2n	,	(6)


   In this way, we obtain the normalized coordinates pˆl = Hlpl and pˆr = Hr pr that can be used 
in the eight-point algorithm described above. Note that Hl and Hr are not the same and they 
should be computed separately.
The eight point algorithm then gives us a matrix F˜; this is related to the original matrix F˜ by

F = HT F˜Hl.	(7)


4	Finding the epipoles

The projective coordinates of the epipoles are the null spaces of matrices F and FT . You can find 
them by computing the SVD
F = UDVT	(8)

of F. The left image epipole el is the column of V associated with the smallest singular value; the 
right image epipole er is the column of U associated with the smallest singular value. You will 
remember that the smallest singular value should be zero, since the fundamental matrix F has 
rank two. If it is not (which is probably the case), set it to zero and recompute matrix F from the 
(modified) decomposition. This is the correct way of enforcing the singularity constraint, in that 
it entails the least possible modification of matrix F in terms of the Frobenius distance (square 
root of the sum of the squares of the components).


5	Verifying the epipolar constraint

Verify the epipolar constraint by drawing the lines

r Fpl(i) = 0	(9)

on the right image for at least two points i1,2 of the left image. The corresponding points pr (i1,2) 
in the right image should lie on the respective line.
Do the same in the other direction, starting from the corresponding points in the right image.


6	Documentation

Include the following items in your report:

•	A discussion of the Epipolar equation and the Fundamental matrix.

•	Images with the epipolar lines and the corresponding points (either use Matlab or a paint 
program to mark the points)




Appendix: Useful Matlab commands


eig 
eigs 
svd 
mean 
sum 
imread
impixel 
help

